---
layout: post
title: I don't know it
---

Bret Victor released a [talk](http://worrydream.com/dbx/) recently
that is really worth watching.  Go watch it *now* I'll be here when
you get back.  In fact if you watch it, think about it, and forget to
come back I am happy too.

Aside from this talk being really enjoyable because it was wonderfully
designed and performed.  Aside from this talk being really depressing
because of it being able to be so meaningful at this time.  It had a
great lesson that we can't be reminded of too much.

When I was still in academics I used to tell the students, and most
especially the PhD students, that the most important thing to learn was
that you didn't know anything.  At least once I succeeded in getting
this message across.

I did a reading course with an undergraduate student.  He had wanted
to take the graduate course I was teaching on the subject, but
suspecting he might not be ready I suggested this more managed form.
It turned out this more managed form was not managed enough, and it
became a frustrating semester.  At various times I tried to convince
the student that his approach was not working.  My failure at
convincing him of this seemed complete.

So far this story can apply in broad strokes to several students I
have worked with.  This situation was different by me running into the
student a year later and him stopping me to tell me he now understood.
He was now taking some basic graduate classes (which in the US have
lots of structure to them) and that context helped him understand what
I had been trying to tell him (his words).

We have lost contact so I don't know how the story really finishes,
but getting that kind of feedback made me very happy.  It is often
hard to tell how well or poorly you are doing while teaching.

Getting the message across to other people is one thing; getting it
across to yourself is another.  The title of this post is one of the
rules I try to live by "I don't know it".  If you don't know it, it is
alright to ask lots of questions, it is alright to spend more time on
something than originally imagined, and it is alright to fail.

To rationally know something, and to really act on it are two
different things.  Bret Victor's talk was to me a great reminder about
how good it is to not know it.